---
layout: post
title: Paradise Lost
score: NYCFC 2 - 3 Montreal Impacte
tags:
    - Montreal Impact
image: 2015-08-01-montreal.jpg
quote: |
    Divinity must live within herself:<br>
    Passions of rain, or moods in falling snow;<br>
    Grievings in loneliness, or unsubdued<br>
    Elations when the forest blooms; gusty<br>
    Emotions on wet roads on autumn nights;<br>
    All pleasures and all pains, remembering<br>
    The bough of summer and the winter branch.<br>
    These are the measures destined for her soul.<br>
text: '"Sunday Morning"'
text-author: Wallace Stevens
categories:
    - Stevens, Wallace
form: poetry
external_link: http://www.hudsonriverblue.com/2015/8/2/9087707/paradise-lost
---

The day we've been waiting for has ostensibly come. And yet what might have
been a day of jubilation feels, today, like a day of reckoning: the realization
of a dream, no matter what it looks like, still takes away the dream as such. We
can't say "when" anymore, because "when" is now---and that means dealing with
what's in front of us. 

Two weeks have meant two long-awaited debuts, albeit one
significantly longer-awaited than the other. Since my last writing, Pirlo and
Lampard have taken the pitch
to tremendous applause, the former's the more pronounced because it came at the
midpoint of an important victory. Most commentors have noted, rightly, that
Pirlo's introduction gave the team a potential it had previously lacked. Like the
philosopher's stone turning
lead to gold, Pirlo's presence was less of a direct intervention and more of
a catalyst, transforming the elements around it without itself seeming to
change. And in the week intervening between Orlando and
Montreal, it was impossible for any blue-hearted New Yorker not to wonder what
the promise shown Sunday would look like when multiplied by yet another legend
in the midfield in Frank Lampard. The prospects were nothing, to the unchecked imagination, but sweetness and light.

Saturday's performance settled instead like the humid afternoon that contained it,
lethargic and inescapable.<!--break-->

We have had our share of difficult losses, as fans. But in each of them we had
something we will, from now on, no longer have: the ability to say, "Just until Lampard
arrives, and Pirlo; just until we have all three DPs." No matter how the rest of the
season goes, this particular form of escapism will be closed to us. No matter
how well they play, it will be "Not as a god, but as a god might be / Naked
among" us. 

Wallace Stevens's poem "Sunday Morning" has more for New York City FC
supporters than just a distraction from another sort of Sunday morning. Stevens
and his female interlocutor contemplate a Sunday morning without the thought of
divinity---and by extension, a world that does not go beyond what is in front
of us, a surface without any depth. A world without heaven, in other words. But
it is not the world without heaven *per se* that concerns Stevens. His
preoccupation is what the absence of heaven does to those occupying a world
that is, suddenly, all there is. What if the world were paradise, and paradise
the world? To this end he reduces paradise to an observable, physical reality:
"Does ripe fruit never fall? Or do the boughs / Hang always heavy in that
perfect sky...?" And the reverse, with paradise becoming "so like our perishing
earth," and the commonalities exposed: those aspects of life on earth that
remain unattainable, ideals despite being materially manifest, "the same receding shores
/ That never touch with inarticulate pang." Elsewhere, the sky becomes "Not
this dividing and indifferent blue"---not a mere barrier to paradise---but
"next in glory" only "to enduring love." Paradise is found in the vagaries of
the material world, or not at all: hence today's passage, which could have been
almost any handful of lines from this long and difficult poem. "Divinity must live within"
ourselves and the experience of the actual, because the paradise we want was
only, paradoxically, attainable in its very absence. 

In this sense, we had Lampard most fully while we continued to wait, often
impatiently, for him to arrive.

None of this is to say that we should be disappointed with the performances of
Andrea Pirlo or Frank Lampard any more than we are disappointed with the
performances of the whole team. Quite the opposite. I mean to recognize the
extent to which the idea of these arrivals comforted us more than their actual
presence will be able to at first. But like Stevens's, my thoughts are ultimately
resolve in a celebration of the actual. I am among the throng irrationally
cheering every touch, whatever happens next, for the simple joy of the still
simpler fact that we get to watch them play in our stadium. That may have to
be enough for the immediate future. And there may be "gusty / Emotions on wet
roads on autumn nights" and "Grievings in loneliness" awaiting us, but those come
with---even create the conditions for---"unsubdued / Elations." 

I have titled this post after a different poem entirely, much longer, much more
difficult: "Paradise Lost." I find the pun, as I often do with puns,
irresistable. Paradise has been "lost" in the sense that Wallace Stevens
narrates: it is lost as a concept with which we can fill the otherwise barren
Sunday morning (in our case, the Sunday morning after a difficult defeat). But
if we are defining "paradise" as a team with Villa, Pirlo, and Lampard, then
in a very crude sense, paradise lost. 

But I, for my part, think that's okay. I'll take what's
in front of me, as long as it's real.
