---
layout: post
title: '"Natural Place": On Forging a Hybrid Culture'
score: NYCFC 2 - 0 NE Revolution
tags: 
  - New England Revolution
image: 2015-03-15-new-england.jpeg
quote: |
  "Americans, rightly or wrongly, are commended for the ease with which they adapt themselves to foreign conditions...."<br><br>

  "'You should live in your own land;<!--break--> whatever it may be you have your natural place there. If we're not good Americans we're certainly poor Europeans; we've no natural place here. We're mere parasites, crawling over the surface; we haven't our feet in the soil. At least one can know it and not have illusions.'"
text: <i>The Portrait of a Lady</i>
text-author: Henry James
categories:
  - James, Henry
---

I probably exemplify a certain demographic of NYCFC supporters. Before this season I attended sporting events very rarely, and usually half-ironically; I had never been to an MLS match before; the only time I had seen a professional-level football match at all (if you can even call it that) was a Greece vs. Bolivia friendly at Red Bull Stadium in an ersatz stag do.[^1] That is to say, passionate Bolivia supporters and their many flags were the only taste I'd had of fan atmosphere, and in that case I was distinctly not a part of it. I had no referent for the collective roars creeping into the TV stream but the account from Nick Hornby's (excellent) *Fever Pitch*.

That changed Sunday. <!--break-->Whether it was from the admirable if occasionally overwrought chants floating over from the supporters groups or the spontaneous but somehow unsurprising "Fuck New England!" that seemed to come out of the sky, atmosphere there was. In fact, there was so much atmosphere that it's been taking a fair bit of the media attention from the club itself, with the New York Times even giving fan culture half of Sunday's headline ("New York City F.C. Earns Its First Victory as Fans Forge Culture in Temporary Home"). It's no wonder why. The success and longevity of the club tied to enthusiasm of a still-mysterious fan base, and whether football can take root in the States is by now a slightly hackneyed topic of speculation that still somehow interests the general sports writer.[^2] The question that remains is what kind of fan culture it's going to be: American, British, Spanish? Something else entirely?

This is a difficult question, and not just for the reasons you'd expect. It isn't just that football is a basically European sport and we're not Europeans.[^3] It's also that the American identity has always had a complex cultural relationship to expatriatism, even (perhaps especially) where it appears to disavow it. The way it happens in Henry James makes a pretty neat picture of the actuality: almost everyone is of contested cultural identity. Ralph Touchett a British-born, American-educated child of American parents who live in England and Florence, respectively. Gilbert Osmond is of vaguely American extraction despite having lived in Italy for his entire life. Henrietta Stackpole (gotta love these names), the spokesperson of American jingoism, ends up marrying a European and becoming an expatriate herself. And the perspective on these matters that presides is equally conflicted, with Americans defined by "the ease with which they adapt themselves to foreign conditions" while being essentially "parasites, crawling over the surface" of Europeanness in the eyes of some characters because of just that adaptability. Above all this hangs the attachment to place---think of the rhetorical mileage of "American soil" in, for example, immigration debates---that is somehow able to coexist with this parasitic adaptability.[^4] 

So what does this have to do with NYCFC and leaping out of my seat as, for the first time, a voluntary member of a crowd that wasn't protesting anything? This: that the battle among free-floating fan cultures is playing out in the bleachers (or should I say "terraces"?) just like it did in the rest of the country in vastly different contexts. Consider one of the chants sauntering over from the supporters groups, to the tune of The White Stripes' "Seven Nation Army." Undoubtedly American. A recent example of one of the things American can definitely put its flag in, its music. But just as undoubtedly, its appearance at Yankee's Stadium on Sunday has more to do with its popularity in European stadiums than its Americanness. An example close to my own heart is as a vehicle for "Ooooh, San-ti Ca-zor-la!" at the Emirates. What's at issue here is an American cultural export becoming European in the specific context of footballing. Or, to refer to a more notorious scuffle, is there any doubt that the season opener of NYCFC against Orlando City SC was a battle in the forces of "Football" versus "Soccer"? What will  the language of American football sound like when America and football are both so multilingual? The question of what this culture will look like is going to be around awhile. 

A fitting question for a New York team to have to ask, indeed. The Bolivian and Greek supporters at my pre-nuptial adventure in Hamilton all came from New York, and for each of them football was far from new. What my approach till now leaves out is the thousands of NYCFC supporters with a more authentic football culture than will ever come from chanting either "Wanker!" or "Fuck Boston!" all season long. Whatever form the fan culture resolves into, it will need to be capacious enough to contain all these elements, like the city itself does (or claims to). It will always be a fraught contest. But as far as I'm concerned, every New Yorker has the right to say "Fuck Boston!" while throwing out the double-wanker gesture. Lord knows I will be.

But whatever American football culture ends up looking like in New York, I think the fact that 43,000 people turned out for a team that had never played at home has a lot to do with the timing of the team's inception in relation to cultural authenticity. Many NYCFC supporters are clearly knowledgeable in a way that betrays their experience as spectators, and probably have years-old European loyalties to which they add this new one. But it's not clear how many NYCFC supporters had never intentionally watched ninety minutes of football before the 2014 World Cup, nor how big the opening crowd would have been in 2013.[^5] For this latter camp and for other recent fans of football, NYCFC offers a kind of redemption. Your support of the game may be newly minted, but the club you support is newer still, and however many years down the line you want to go you'll still have been there from the beginning. (The club organization has obviously made a lot of this idea in the season ticket marketing campaign, but there's something to it nevertheless.) Put another way, the newbie football supporter has a chance to wash out the mark of inauthenticity without having to wait through years of disappointments and triumphs to do it. Similarly, the fan culture can't *not* be authentic in a certain sense, because it's one of the only ones of its kind, minted in 2015 after the American coming-to-consciousness with respect to football. Authenticity doesn't necessarily have to come from *history*, as long as it's coming about organically. 

Which is all to say: we should be cavalier about what we take, invent, and propagate in our stands. But we should be careful to think of the cultural soil of New York from which it's growing, and we should be just as careful about what pre-packaged doses of football and sporting culture we accept. We should be especially careful about the ones with price tags, and it's absolutely crucial to forsake the stains of homophobia, misogyny, and racism all too common to other American sports. Culture that comes from nowhere can be understood as inauthentic, but it can also be understood in utopian terms, as a chance to make something completely new. It should be clear by now which side I'm on.

\#LeaveNemecAlone

[^1]: I have nothing but contempt for the actual stag do as a ritual. This was me and my older brother drinking beer among the Bolivia supporters in the nosebleeds. He decided to support Greece to spite me, and as with every game surrounding the 2014 World Cup (excluding USA and England matches), my support was determined by the lowest GDP-per-capita.

[^2]: The answer, for those of you playing at home, is that of course it fucking can.

[^3]: That hasn't exactly stopped South American nations, has it?

[^4]: You can also see something like this debate happening in another context in J. Hillis Miller's 1986 address to the MLA, in which he discusses the tension between "cultural meaning" that grows "naturally from meanings secretly inherent in the base, so that the culture is in magical correspondence with the matter of which it is constructed" and a culture that "may be impost arbitrarily as a kind of free-floating surface" (282-3). The idea here is that the cultural history of America has always had this irresolvable contradiction, with plenty of proponents for the superficiality of American culture, among them William Carlos Williams, Herman Melville, Nathaniel Hawhtorne---and I'm tempted to add Henry James.

[^5]: I should put my own cards on the table. I haven't been a lifelong football fan, far from it, but I did come in a bit ahead of the World Cup. I fell in love with the sport after a somewhat accidental encounter with it not long after NBC started streaming Premier League matches, and after a few Saturdays of EPL fell just as hard for Arsenal. (I know, fuck off.) This makes me a latecomer for many, but by the time the World Cup came around I had no intention of missing more than a few matches, even the completely inconsequential ones. Where authenticity is concerned, though, which is where I'm going with all this, I can pretty nearly relate to those whose love of football began in June of 2014. 
