---
layout: post
title: Harrison Red Bull 2 - 1 NYCFC
tags: 
  - Harrison Red Bull 
image: 2015-05-10-harrison-red-bull.jpg
quote: |
  According to Brueghel<br>
  when Icarus fell<br>
  it was spring<br>
  <br>
  a farmer was ploughing<br>
  his field<br>
  the whole pageantry<br>
  <br>
  of the year was<br>
  awake tingling<br>
  near<br>
  <br>
  the edge of the sea<br>
  concerned<br>
  with itself<br>
  <br>
  sweating in the sun<br>
  that melted<br>
  the wings\' wax<br>
  <br>
  unsignificantly<br>
  off the coast<br>
  there was<br>
  <br>
  a splash quite unnoticed<br>
  this was<br>
  Icarus drowning<br>
text: 'Landscape with the Fall of Icarus<br><small>(from <i>Pictures from Bruegel)</i></small>'
text-author: William Carlos Williams 
categories:
  - Williams, William Carlos
form: poetry
quotelength: long
---

Well, so obviously, we're not drowning. There <i>is</i> that.

Bruegel's Icarus is almost undetectable, hence the title of the poem: a <i>landscape</i>. He's a pair of heels kicking at the sky in the water of a---well despite Williams's "off the coast," it's more of a lagoon, actually. (Coast vs. lagoon---kind of reminds you of the criticisms of MLS, no?) Bruegel's brilliance is in relegating Icarus to an ignored, bare set of feet that will be gone in a moment. Williams's is in redirecting the "pageantry" to the "farmer...ploughing/his field" and the drama of arrogance to the "edge of the sea/concerned/with itself." At the same time, Williams does undo, a bit, the deemphasis of Icarus. He ends with his name and his drowning, almost as if he can't bear the very demythification he revels in. 

The question that always gets me about this painting (not the myth itself) is whether failure is worse unnoticed<!--break-->, but after the inaugural derby, I found myself regreting nothing so much as the attention NYCFC has gotten in its inaugural season. I recognize that the ship only keeps sailing if that attention is maintained: no eye of (a bit of) the world, no Villa, no Lampard, no Mix; no neutrals clicking on articles to see if we collapse, nobody watches the victory lap when this turns itself around. When a slow start is almost guaranteed by the nature of the task, though, one could be forgiven for not wanting it to be on many front pages right from the beginning. More than that, it's worth asking how much of the slow start comes from the attention itself.

The two subs Sunday (which made all the difference) tell the story of the peculiar pressure the team is under. Villa's frustration was evident long before he was subbed off, and it manifests itself most when the team looks most lost. It is the frustration of one who has to carry a weight that used to be significantly more distributed, and one who might worry just a bit that the fortunes of the group in its first two seasons will be what too many people remember him for. Mix's anonymity is what happens when the inobjectivity of banter gives way to having to live up to it. The point is that an image-conscious team may be savvy, but it gives itself a tall order on the pitch. No team with as much to prove as NYCFC is ever going to prove as much as it needs to. 

After several minutes of hurling jubilant abuse at the TV when Miazga disgraced himself for the second time, I calmed down and my stomach sank. Now, if anything, the stakes were higher, the very opposite of what I knew needed to happen. Before Harrison went down to ten, we could lose with dignity. After they did, no fewer than three points would do. The pressure this put us under was worse for us than a red the other way would have been, given the scrutiny we've been subject to since the start and especially for the particular match in question. There was more than one kind of pressure game going against us in the Hudson River Derby, and we failed to withstand both.

Simply put, this kind of attention is poison. Garnering the scrutiny is still a good PR strategy, and the PR strategy gets us the stadium, the players, the TV coverage. But the perils of being an expansion team, especially one built from scratch, go deeper than has been recognized, especially for a team based in the best-known city since Rome and legends on the payroll. Here there be dragons, but there are more of them than anybody said there would be and they aren't in the caves we thought they'd be in, licking their heaps of jewels or whatever, purring. They're less predictable, and they're kind of everywhere you look.

***

Here's why eight games without a win is the best thing that could happen to us if it stops here. Villa said in an interview that we've hit "rock bottom," which I regret to say is ridiculous. It could get a lot worse, and it might.[^1] But at this point, the narrative is set at "When they started out, they struggled," and the liberation that comes with the *inevitability* of that narrative (now that we've accepted it) could make this slump as short it can be. We were never going to sail into easy success---nor would anyone in our position---and now everyone knows that. What happened Sunday was mental, through and through (though maybe a little bit of formation problems on top), and it can't be ignored that the high-profile nature of our venture almost guarantees how it's been going. 

With Red Bull behind us, the major tests are done, albeit failed, and the real work can start. The work of building can start now, without the short-term pressure that obscures what most matters in the long run.

Williams and Bruegel both redirect attention from the individual fall to the atmosphere, the landscape, the random-ass farmer staring at the clouds. I think the press has been doing the same thing, and I have been, too. For every stumble the team has, another article goes to press about authenticity (see last week from 90+, for example) or the club's strategy in establishing itself in the New York sports market. Rightly so. At this point, the performances are obscured by the accumulation of results, just like the results of the season will be obscured by what the team eventually becomes. In Bruegel's version, Icarus's ignominy in the moment of his splash is obscured by the myth he becomes.[^2] The self-conscious "sea/concerned/with itself//sweating in the sun" has nothing to do with Icarus himself: it's all environment. And for all its worry, the sea can't prevent his apotheosis.

[^1]: A big part of me worries that the subtext there was "It's hit rock bottom *for me*." 

[^2]: That mythification apparently happens against the run of play, given the wax wings and stuff.