---
layout: post
title: On the Genealogy of Rivalries
score: NYCFC 1 - 3 Harrison Red Bull
tags: 
  - Harrison Red Bull
image: 2015-06-28-harrison.jpg
quote: |
  How much reverene has a noble man for his enemies!&#8212and such reverence is a
  bridge to love.&#8212For he desires his enemy for himself, as his mark of
  distinction; he can endure no other enemy than one in whom there is nothing to
  despise and <i>very much</i> to honor! In contrast to this, picture "the enemy" as the man of <i>ressentiment</i> conceives him&#8212and here
  precisely is his deed, his creation: he has conceived "the evil enemy," "the
  <i>Evil One</i>," and this in fact is his basic concept, from which he then evolves,
  as an afterthought and pendant, a "good one"&#8212himself!
text: <i>On the Genealogy of Morals</i>
text-author: Friedrich Nietzsche
categories:
  - Nietzsche, Friedrich
form: Prose
external_link: http://www.hudsonriverblue.com/2015/7/2/8885103/on-the-genealogy-of-rivalries
---

I've never felt a rivalry like this. I don't mean I don't know of any, or I've
never seen one: I mean I've never *felt* it. "Rivalry" even feels like an
inadequate term for what is much more bilious and far less sportsmanlike.
What it's like for the players, I'll never know. But for a fan, seeing a Harrison Red Bull supporter becomes like seeing a version of yourself
who has made a horrible error and who persists in mocking you for not having made 
the same one yourself. It's like Freud's "narcissism of minor differences," in which the
other who disturbs you most, pushes you deepest into fits of disgust, is the
one who differs from you only very slightly---or in the case of a derby, only 
plays a few miles away. Harrison downplays the extent to which we are rivals, which is, of course,
merely a tactic in pursuit of the very rivalry they disown. And in all
probability the players on either team can't be bothered about who is based in
New York and who in New Jersey, the foundation on which much of the banter is
built. You sort of have to assume that, for them, it's all about the history on
the pitch. But even that history is building, and fast. Pick your poison:
Liverpool-Everton, Brazil-Uruguay, Catholic-Protestant; we're on our way.

This kind of rivalry is a feeling that is as hard to shake as it is hard to explain, 
as visceral as it is inexplicable. And it has all the arbitrary intensity of a moral system---though let's hope not quite as
many atrocities will be committed in its name.<!--break-->

Nietzsche tells us (to reduce
it) that moral systems arise from some act of definition by rejection: the good, the
holy, the clean is always us; the bad, the evil, the dirty is always *them*.
Assuming he's right, the reasons to be wary of this tendency
are clear and numerous.[^1] Racism, religious persecution,
homophobia---about every strike against the human race you can think of but 
Nicholas Cage, the explanation for whom continues to elude.  

What's worse, and
what I personally find so disturbing about *The Genealogy of Morals*, is that
in Nietzsche's hands
this type of moral self-definition is naturalized. Like the hunting instinct
in the bird of prey, it's an act that's hardwired into us on the level of species, and
is thus very difficult to condemn as simply as we want to.[^2] At worst
these instincts are with us still as "bad conscience," a kind of self-loathing
in which these instincts, unable to unleash themselves in the wilderness, are
turned against the self in the guise of a moral self-condemnation. 

I say "at worst," because although the cultural and deep-psychological
expressions of "bad conscience" may be inevitable, there are workarounds for the less subliminal
expressions of these instincts. I'd hardly be the first to suggest either that sports
are just a legitimization of the violence we'd otherwise condemn, or (what
amounts to the same thing) that sports are an acceptable container for
competition and violence that prevents them from spilling over into real life.
But the spectator doesn't have any place in that schema: violence committed by
a spectator is still just violence. And this is where rivalry comes in. Instead
of acting as a container for violence, sporting spectatorship cordons off the kind of unthinking condemnation of an
entire swath of people that, outside of an arena, is monstrous. It's catharsis for our baser instincts scaled up to encompass entire fan communities.

The baser instincts, though, also give rise to certain foundational
aspects of culture---but containing rather than eliminating those
instincts (which would anyway be impossible) allows us to hang on to the
cultural self-definition we gain from concepts like "good" and "evil." 
Note the ending of this week's passage: inventing "the Evil One" is
a route to inventing the "good one," which in context means inventing our
conception of ourselves. This is hardly a cause for celebration in Nietzsche's
view,
but in a sporting or spectatorial context we can find room to reclaim what we
want to. 

For one, it's a way of building community; an arbitrary community, but we're in an age when
pretty much every community is arbitrary. To put it slightly more optimistically,
it's one way of *finding* a community in a city as big as New York, in which
community is often lost because of sheer scale. 

But rivalry, and supporting a
club generally, also makes it uniquely justifiable to *pick a side* without thinking
too hard about the consequences. Rivalry lets you say without complication, "This is good, that's bad, we're us and
you're out in the cold, twerp." It exposes the arbitrariness of picking a side and 
revels in it, but it does so without allowing any harm to come of doing so. 
Outside of arena, uncontained, that's called nationalism and it's
dangerous; but since you don't have to reckon with the draconian immigration laws or
criminal foreign policy of a football club, saying "I'm with you no matter
what" is a reasonable act. Sport spectatorship is unique in that it allows for *uncomplicated
partisanship* regarding what happens on the field. And rivalry is just the
ultimate expression of uncomplicated partisanship.

Return one more time to the passage. Note that the construction of the good/bad or good/evil
binary depends on the relative positions of the two groups: the dominant group
defines its opposites as "bad" or "lowly," the dominated group of
*ressentiment* defines its
opposite as "evil." City's been swatted
this year, and the final meeting will, at best, only let us save face---they've taken two
out of three. But we're in a unique position in relation to our own rivalry as
a new team: the terms are being established over the next few seasons. What
kind of shape is this eventually going to take? Are we going to be the "good
one" to their "Evil One"? Or the "good" to their "bad"? Is this the start of
our frustrating inability to overcome them, or their one moment in the sun
before we come into our own and usurp the New York throne?

Remember, I'm a partisan, so I have my theories. I just hope we can think of
our own equivalent of [St. Totteringham's
Day](http://www.espnfc.us/blog/espn-fc-united-blog/68/post/2434676/arsenal-superiority-over-tottenham-st-totteringhams-day)
in time for the end of next season.

[^1]: He himself is not wary of them, of course. Hence my discomfort with a lot
of this material.

[^2]: And indeed Nietzsche *doesn't* condemn them.
