---
layout: post
title: Philadelphia Union 1 - 2 NYCFC
tags: 
  - Philadelphia Union
image: 2015-06-07-philadelphia.jpg
quote: |
  I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.
text: '"Song of Myself"'
text-author: Walt Whitman
categories:
  - Whitman, Walt
form: prose
---

This is less a full post than my own barbaric yawp---a hopefully not too incoherent, somewhat belated registry of the joy at watching our winless streak conclude, and against Philadelphia to boot. But if there is any exaltation more appropriate to the occasion than the goal from Tommy McNamara as an exaltation in its own right, I can't imagine one. It had the clarity of an utterance in an empty room. It had the purposiveness of Whitman's "barbaric yawp" and every bit of the expressiveness as well. It was exactly the kind of thing we need more of from this season. And it came from someone who, contrary to the desires of many, had hardly been spotted on the pitch before this match.

What McNamara's game as a whole had in spades that we've otherwise sorely missed is personality: enough of it that it shows through even when not everything is going well.<!--break--> At his best moments, Villa has enough aplomb to bring out the personality of those around him while still expressing his own. Nemec, at times, has arguably too much personality. [I've suggested before](http://www.hudsonriverblue.com/2015/4/14/8413583/impulse-intention-beauty-edith-wharton-vs-nycfc) that the only functional system is one in which each individual is able to fully express themselves and in doing so contribute to the richness of the whole; I think this is true, incidentally, in political systems as well as tactical ones. So the very last thing I mean is that I want more bursts of individualism, especially when expressed as shots from improbable distances. I do want more plays like McNamara's, though, in which a quick glance to Poku communicated, first, that Tommy had an idea, and two, what Poku had to do to help him realize it. It was a temporary assumption of leadership, and an assumption with it of the responsibility if it goes wrong. 

The problem with too little personal agency (again, in any system) is that the lack of it prevents very much from happening. The problem with too much is that what happens is often at best ineffective and at worst counterproductive. If I had to choose between the extremes, I'd rather that shot have gone over the bar than to have seen another dithering hesitation and lackluster turnover closer to the endline. And even though Mullins's winner may have been more of a solo show, it had the same confidence and impatience with waiting for the perfect opportunity. The extended winless streak had made us too tentative by half before McNamara's wonderstrike, but in an instant that seemed duly thawed.

It isn't just the personalities of individual players that I saw more fully expressed, though, and so the dichotomy is not so clearly defined. At risk of stretching my ad hoc definition of "personality" to its breaking point, I also saw the communal personality of the team begin to come together in our victory over Philadelphia. On one hand, this improvement can be traced to players finally playing in their preferred positions, or in another sense, finding their places in the system. The back line looked much happier, and Facey in particular was a man transformed by playing in his preferred spot at centerback. But there was also a stronger tactical identity put forward by Kreis, an artifact of the same decisiveness that motivated McNamara's audacious equalizer. In the first half, it was clear just how important it was to the plan not to concede a first-half goal at any cost, an intention we just barely realized with a goal against us coming in the first minute of the second half. In the second half, more traction was to be found, we maintained more possession, and the hard-won ability to pick ourselves up after somewhat unjust disappointment made itself known again. We've finally started to play the system that Kreis has said he built this team to play, and it's paying off; what's perhaps more important, we're sticking with one formation for long enough to internalize it. People are starting to spread out and impose themselves on unforgiving circumstance, and they're doing it in some approximation of harmony.

Today's quote from "Song of Myself" is more well known than I usually like to go, but it's always stuck out to me as a vision of the pure expression of *being*, a condensed version of what Whitman is doing throughout the poem, and I couldn't pass it up. Becuase the more we're willing to make the match a ninety-minute expression of our collective personality, the more results like this one we can expect. It will take a combination of individual brilliance and communal play, but ideally the two will become aspects of the same larger expression. It may be that these goals will contradict each other for a time: I've suggested [via Heaney](http://ninetyplusofblue.com/heaney,%20seamus/2015/05/23/real-salt-lake/) that such contradictions have plagued us in recent weeks. But if we build on what we've done, these contradictions will disappear into something approaching the ideal system I've described. Or perhaps better: in time, NYCFC will be more able to embrace the productive contradictions---to say, with Whitman, "Do I contradict myself? / Very well, then I contradict myself, / (I am large, I contain multitudes.)"
