---
layout: post
title: Chicago Fire 1 - 0 NYCFC
tags: 
  - Chicago Fire 
image: yeats-kreis-wide.jpg
quote: |
  Now all the truth is out,<br>
  Be secret and take defeat<br>
  From any brazen throat,<br>
  For how can you compete,<br>
  Being honour bred, with one<br>
  Who, were it proved he lies,<br>
  Were neither shamed in his own<br>
  Nor in his neighbours' eyes?<br>
  Bred to a harder thing<br>
  Than Triumph, turn away<br>
  And like a laughing string<br>
  Whereon mad fingers play<br>
  Amid a place of stone,<br>
  Be secret and exult,<br>
  Because of all things known<br>
  That is most difficult.
text: '"To a Friend whose Work has come to Nothing"' 
text-author: William Butler Yeats 
categories:
  - Yeats, William Butler
form: poetry
quotelength: long
---

'Be secret and exult, / Because of all things known / That is most difficult': a difficulty to which I think most NYCFC supporters can relate the morning after our defeat by Chicago. The developmental work of the previous three games, however disappointing those results were themselves, appeared to have "come to Nothing" as the cohesiveness and strong performance dissolved. Most worrying were the signs of mental strain that made themselves known from the first minute. The occasional giveaway now had a ragged edge of desparation. Mistakes like Meara's began to occur, and those do not happen in a void---nor does the panic that culminated in Jacobson's dismissal. The stresses of being an expansion team have arrived in full: these were in evidence on the pitch and in the less faithful fans who, according to rumor, have begun to waver.<!--break-->

Assurances to the contrary aside, it's worth asking whether this locker room is in danger of turning against itself. I choose my words carefully. I'm not suggesting that it *is* in danger of doing so. Rather, I find myself wondering who it is in the team who has the personality to shore up the resolve, quell the anxieties to the extent needed to avoid calamities like Friday's. 

Thinking of the conditions under which NYCFC entered the match, it becomes clear how powerful that personality would have to be and how sorely it is needed. Saunders in goal provides a safety net, and that net has been used pretty liberally. Hernandez is, by all accounts, the organizational heart of the back four. We have yet to prove that we can reliably score without Villa. And with Facey across an ocean, it must have been clear to all concerned that we were (pun emphatically intended) on our last line of defense. Add an exponent for the pressure of a five-game winless streak, and you can imagine how you'd be lucky to get onto the field with less than a curdled stomach. 

I know there are plenty of people in that locker room who have experience with rough patches. The last thing I mean to do is sell Kreis short, whose pedigree in seeing oneself through a stretch like this is well established: he captained Real Salt Lake through a first season that ended with a double-digit winless streak and left them second-to-last above the late Chivas USA. But with Villa left behind, I wonder who among the players has the authority to inspire the necessary confidence. I even find myself wondering whether we'd have generated a different mentality if we had, say, a Lampard on the roster, someone whose expertise is indisputable but who is admired as much for his leadership as his own ability. But there wasn't a Lampard on Friday, there won't be one for at least another month, and in the meantime, something needs to be done to keep the team positive. And while it's hard to know how seriously to take the dismay on social media and in the forums, it appears that some of the fans need a boost of confidence as much as the players do.

"Bred to a harder thing / Than Triumph, turn away...." These poor fortunes are by no means certain to relent in the coming run of difficult opponents, with neither the Sounders, the Red Bulls, nor Real Salt Lake looking like anything to sneeze at. Nevertheless, players and supporters alike will all have to see beyond results. The point is to do as well as possible---of course. To say anything else would be ridiculous, and it would be just as ridiculous to downplay or criticize the visceral sensation of defeat, which must be overwhelming in the players and exists in miniature in supporters. At serious risk (rather, with guarantee) of melodrama, I point out that the word "suffer" has built into it the sense of undergoing something beyond one's control. So I won't demonize being disappointed with the result. 

There is a difference, though, between disappointment with a result and disappointment with a team. A football team, and especially a new one, is fundamentally a gestalt. Far more than its players, organization, or results, it's an idea that takes on the cast every supporter's relationship to it, however contradictory those relationships might be; it also in some way contains its location, even for those who will never make it to New York or Liverpool or Rome. But as an identity, it exists independent of and well beyond all these things, at the same time that it is constituted by them. So for a supporter to jump from disappointment with a winless run to disappointment with the team would be a more complicated and heartbreaking state of affairs than it might seem at first glance. Doing so would risk condemning everything that passes through the capacious nexus of the team as a concept, not just the players, manager, and organization, but everything else that has been brought to it by the community. The "harder thing / Than Triumph" that Yeats speaks of is fidelity to the gestalt and, paradoxically, fidelity as part of the gestalt. The harder state to maintain is attentiveness to the part of something that goes beyond its temporary form. 

Players and supporters alike will have to establish now what will make the team as an entity endure. Yeats's image of secret exultation, the "laughing string / Whereon mad fingers play / Amid a place of stone," establishes a model of unwavering vitality, not just toughness but continued sensibility within that toughness. This overstates the relationship of a supporter to a team and especially a single result. Of course it does. But the reason football is attractive is that it is life in a snowglobe floored with fresh sod, where happenings are contained to the influence of an apprehensible number of elements. It becomes a testing ground for experiences of fidelity and vitality and defeat.

The type of toughness that needs to be developed, then, is the type that Yeats describes, from a dark moment of his life when his plans were coming to nothing, or seeming to. It will mean feeling the defeat every time it happens, even as that feeling is withstood. But over time, if there is the right culture to enable it, the loyalty this state implies will become part of the team's identity. The risk is that, with the wrong culture, its opposite could be, too.

