---
layout: post
title: 
score: NYCFC 3 - 1 Preseason
tags:
    - Preseason
image: 2016-02-27-preseason_full.jpg
quote: |
    Back now, all of them, to their local lives<br>
    ...as the dismantled Show<br>
    Itself dies back into the area of work.<br>
    Let it stay hidden there like strength, below<br>
    Sale-bills and swindling; something people do,<br>
    Not noticing how time's rolling smithy-smoke<br>
    Shadows much greater gestures; something they share<br>
    That breaks ancestrally each year into<br>
    Regenerate union. Let it always be there.
text: "Show Saturday"
text-author: Larkin, Phillip
categories:
    - Larkin, Phillip
form: poetry
---

The winter was a long one. In the time since last season ended and now, we've
retreated to the distant comforts of our Premier League sides, and none of
*those* are doing anything like what we expected (for better or worse). The
roster has turned over almost beyond recognition, most notably in a new hand on
the tiller, Patrick "V-for-Victory" Vieira. Only three of the inaugural
starting eleven are likely to start come March 6th: Saunders, Mix, and Villa.
Enough has changed that being a supporter of NYCFC in 2016 promises to be a
qualitatively different experience than it was in 2015.

Not that this is a bad thing in every sense. There's plenty about last season I
left cheerily by the wayside "as the dismantled Show / Itself die[d] back into
the area of work." Or so I muttered under my breath, shuffling out of the
stadium for the last game of the 2015 season, a 3-1 defeat against a team going
on to (slightly) better things. Around me were signs of anything *but*
"regenerate union": a season that ended in disappointment bubbling over into
incandescent rage in my section-mates; one short bearded man shouting, more sad
than angry, more deflated than sad, "You're bums!" The failure to reach the
playoffs, the 50% loss rate, the eleven games without a win---that can all go
ahead and confine itself to history where it can't get us anymore. 

But how will having any "history" at all, however meager, change what it means
to support this team? For one, we'll be done with the Year of the Historic
First Everything (TM): the Historic First Set-Piece Goal, Historic First
Totally Unnecessary Red-Card Tackle, Historic First Supporters-Group Squabble.
It gave the good things the significance of greatness, but it gave the bad
things a punishing weight. On one hand, nobody is likely to forget Villa's
first goal or the stadium after that first win. I think about it more than I
feel comfortable specifying. On the other, when things fell apart, I have the
feeling the pressure of newness made it harder to put them back together.

Now that's done, the good and the bad---but it isn't gone. The distinction is
crucial. In terms of community, its hard to overstate the difference having
shared experience like that makes.

This is more or less what Philip Larkin shows us in "Show Saturday." Of course,
it's almost comical to talk about the poem in the context of our city, and not
just becuase it's a poem about a kind of circus. It's also that, whether he's
writing about Coventry where he was born or Hull where he died, the difference
in scale is enormous. We can hardly say that the ramshackle structures of our
weekly "Show" get packed away in the off-season into the backs of trucks:
Yankee Stadium still looms over the Harlem River. But it's certainly true that
whatever brings people together in the stands retreats "below / Sale-bills and
swindling" when we return to the sidewalks of Fifth Avenue. For the most part,
we left the stadium, took off our hats, and went back to stealing cabs from
each other. And, sure, that's probably how it should be. 

But now, when we arrive at Yankee Stadium, we'll already know each other, and
we'll have all those Historic Firsts in common. When you ask what Larkin can
tell us about life in the stands, you start to see that its simple *recurrence*
is the basis of its communal power. The culture that began to develop last
year, and which is the basis of what will remain intact over an offseason of
changes, is the source of what we "share / That breaks ancestrally each year
into / Regenerate union." It isn't the "Show" itself that leads to
"[r]egenerate union," but the annual return of the ancestral. In the same way,
the first "Hey! Baby" chant will be so triumphant because of its combination of
familiarity and long absence. Most important, it will reincorporate into a
single mass the multiplicity of individuals, who for months have refreshed
their Twitter feeds in isolation, waiting for team news. Returning to the same
place makes an enclave of the "local" in a city where that can be so hard to
find. The differences between New York City and a small town with a local club
are able, momentarily, to be forgotten. 

This might not be new for supporters of other clubs with more history. But for
us, it's the Historic First Time We Get to Do This Thing Again. 

In an off-season when so much has changed, then, we have gained something:
recurrence, the experience of a shared history (albeit brief). This is only
gained because of what is retained, "hidden there like strength." And, to echo
Larkin: "Let it always be there."

