---
layout: post
title: Opinion&#58 Inoculations Against Toxicity
score: NYCFC 2 - 2 Orlando City SC
tags:
    - Orlando
image: 2016-05-30-orlando.png
quote: | 
    Trying to light a log that's lain in the damp<br>
    as long as this house has stood&#58<br>
    even with dry sticks I can't get started<br>
    even with thorns.<br>
    I twist last year into a knot of old headlines<br>
    ---this rose won't bloom.<br>
    <br>
    ---Adrienne Rich, "The Phenomenology of Anger"<br>
    <br>
    All these things entered you<br>
    As if they were both the door and what came through it.<br>
    <br>
    ---Seamus Heaney, "Markings"
text: 
text-author: 
categories: 
    - Rich, Adrienne
    - Heaney, Seamus
form: poetry
---

When the equalizer went in, I stood up and stared, my mouth open, shocked (it
felt) at the sheer audacity of it. It was as though I had staked everything on
blind trust, and that trust had been betrayed. I pounded my hat against the
empty seat in front of me (they had left early, poor optimistic fools; probably
there for the first time). I walked to the aisle, intending to leave before the
whistle to make a "point," paused, walked back (my mouth was still open), and
sat down just in time for the whistle to blow. And I sat. And finally I booed. 

I've been able to forget about my strange dance of disappointment. But a day
and change later, I'm still embarrassed at booing. One of my most closely held
beliefs regarding any sport is that you don't boo your own team: you boo the
ref, basically no matter what the circumstance, and you boo the other team for
whatever reprehensible trash they get up to (hitting the ball with their foot,
hitting it with their head, etc.). But only the worst variety of miscreant boos
their own. And now I find myself among those ranks.

There's nothing wrong with being upset and showing it. The passion of the thing
is why we sign up in the first place. But at some point, you sort of have to
ask where the limits are, and from there you have to ask:

At what point do we risk becoming toxic?

Admittedly, it's a touchy subject with me, because I'm part of two fanbases who
are pretty routinely criticized, NYCFC and Arsenal. There are more
similarities: both teams routinely underperform, considering the talent on the
pitch, and both have pretty dubious records at home. (NYCFC has more plausible
excuses for both shortcomings.) Defiantly of the "Wenger In" persuasion, I
spent the end of the EPL season dismayed by [the protests of the
manager](http://arseblog.com/2016/05/arsenal-1-0-norwich-win-protests-reaction/)
even though I think change should and will happen in the next few years. And
although Wenger was apparently trying to commit suicide-by-media when he
[suggested](http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2626337-arsene-wenger-comments-on-arsenal-fans-criticism-after-win-vs-everton)
that the fans were creating a "sceptical" atmosphere at home---saying he
"couldn’t understand why, at the moment when you need everyone behind the team,
in such an important moment, we had to hit that storm"---I found myself taking
his side. The reason is that I think there's an important insight in his
comments about the circularity of booing.

The problem, in short, is that giving crap to your own team creates the
conditions in which they're more likely to fail, meaning you to give them the
same crap all over again. It's the same logic as in the Heaney quote, which
I've taken badly out of context from a poem called "Markings" (which, by the
way, begins with a passage tangentially about pickup soccer). "All these things
entered you / As if they were both the door and what came through it" seems to
me to represent this circularity perfectly, something that creates the
conditions for its own existence, forging an opening ("the door) in which it
can then appear("c[o]me through it"). The main question regarding the topic at
hand is whether vocal displays of displeasure actually do make a difference in
the performances on the pitch.

Let me be perfectly clear: I'm not blaming the fans for the team's frustrating
inability to see out a game, nor the calamity of the Red Bull Wedding, which
can only be explained by cosmic rays or Mix selling his soul to Satan to [score
against Germany that one
time](http://www.sbnation.com/soccer/2015/6/10/8761921/usa-germany-score-update-mix-diskerud-goal).
But if it's a matter of having the proverbial "twelfth player" at home or not,
or even just making it slightly easier to forget about everything else and
focus on the game, anything that might help is worth considering.

I don't actually know if anyone else was booing at the end of the Orlando game
or not, being in a kind of a fugue state at the time, so I might have been the
lone sad sack embarrassing everyone else. But I'm (obviously) also kind of
thinking of the Lampard thing. I'm annoyed with him, though mainly with the
front office and CFG, for the way every aspect of his tenure at NYCFC has been
handled. I'm also far from sure that booing him makes any sense, which is why I
haven't and won't. No matter how many overtures he and Vieira make to the
team's professionalism and ability to shut all that out, who actually believes
that there aren't a few moments after coming on---maybe important moments,
where focus would make a difference---that he has to waste trying not to think
about the boos? It's clearly on other people's minds. Jack Harrison recently
tweeted defending Lampard and asking why people are booing, which I admire as
much as I think tweeting about it is a terrible idea. (He appears to also be
reading the replies, God help him.) But if he was moved to make a response, we
can at least be sure it's probably still on his mind. If that's something he
thinks about years down the line when a team in the Championship offers to
bring him back to England, will booing Lampard have been worth it? What about
when he comes on Thursday against Real Salt Lake? And when people yell stuff at
Saunders because they want Vieira to give Johansen a run: even if he can't hear
it, is it worth the risk that he will?

If there's an argument, here, it's to keep looking forward when it comes to
expressing ourselves from the stands. The home form is like Adrienne Rich's
"log that's lain in the damp / as long as this house has stood" in her aptly
named "Phenomenology of Anger": trying to light it by "twist[ing] last year
into a knot of old headlines" is useless. It makes it more likely that we'll
repeat last year instead of building on it, or at the very least that this year
will feel more like last year. 

Hudson River Blue has been on the forefront of [trying to figure out what the
hell was actually going
on](http://www.hudsonriverblue.com/2015/3/3/8139571/hrb-presents-spherical-episode-1-if-you-can-make-it-here)
with Ball Park Frank, rightly blaming him for what is ultimately his
responsibility. I think we should *all* be critical of him and everyone else in
the front office or at CFG who mishandled things so badly. This is more about
considering what is expressed in the stadium as a function of getting what we
want---both in terms of the results and the experience of supporting.

At the Emirates during the protests and at Yankee Stadium on Sunday, there was
some toxic fandom---but there was ultimately more of the antidote. Chants of
"One Arsène Wenger" drowned out anything the "Wenger Out" contingent could
muster. Likewise, when Lampard came on, there was a palpable effort by the
majority to drown out the boos with cheers. I for one take that as a marching
order. Let's let the support be louder than the frustration.
